
* Sequences and Collection
    How many ways are there of choosing a collection of 5 students
    from a class of 15?
    So if we wanted to say how many ways are there
    of choosing class officers-- a president,
    and a vice president, a secretary, a treasurer, or a correspondent?
    That would be a sequence of 5 students because we'd know who was president,
    and who was vice president, et cetera.
    But if we wanted to choose a committee of 5 students,
    it wouldn't make any difference what order they were chosen,
    and that would be a collection.

    How many ways are there of choosing a collection of 5 students
    from a class of 15?
    So if we wanted to say how many ways are there
    of choosing class officers-- a president,
    and a vice president, a secretary, a treasurer, or a correspondent?
    That would be a sequence of 5 students because we'd know who was president,
    and who was vice president, et cetera.
    But if we wanted to choose a committee of 5 students,
    it wouldn't make any difference what order they were chosen,
    and that would be a collection.
    Well, we know how to do this.
    If we assign the 5 students places in a line, that's a sequence.
    There are 15 choices for the first student in the line,
    14 choices for the second, 13 for the third, 12 for the fourth,
    and 11 for the last in line.
    So the multiplication principle tells us there are 15 times 14 times 13 times
    12 times 11, or 15 factorial divided by 10 factorial ways of lining these five
    students up.
    That's the number of sequences taken from a class.
    And we know how to do that.
    But if we don't care who comes first or second or third
    but just want to calculate the number of ways of choosing a collection,
    how do we do that?
    Well, we're going to show you how to do that using the multiplication
    principle.
    Suppose the answer to our problem of counting the number of collections
    is capital N. Once we've got one collection of 5 students,
    there are exactly 5 factorial ways of lining them up in a sequence.
    Because of these five students, there are 5 choices for who goes first,
    then 4 choices who goes second, 3 for who goes third, 2 for who goes fourth,
    and then 1 student remaining goes fifth.
    By the multiplication principle, therefore, the total number
    of sequences of 5 students, taken from a class of 15,
    is given by the formula n, the number of collections, times 5 factorial.
    But we already know the number of sequences
    is 15 factorial over 10 factorial.
    So equating our two ways of calculating the number of sequences,
    we get that n times 5 factorial is equal to 15 factorial divided
    by 10 factorial.
    And dividing by 5 factorial, we can solve for the answer.
    The number of collections n is 15 factorial
    divided by 10 factorial times 5 factorial, which is 15 times 14 times
    13 times 12 times 11 divided by 5 times 4 times 3 times 2 times 1 or 3,003.
    Let's illustrate this one more time, and then we'll do the general problem.
    Suppose we want to choose a pizza, and we want to put 3 toppings on it
    from a list of 6 toppings, and our 3 toppings should be distinct.
    Well, if we choose a sequence of toppings,
    namely we choose an order first, we'll put on this topping then
    we'll put on this topping, then we'll put on this topping.
    We get a possible choices of 6 times 5 times 4 or 120 choices.
    But from the point of view of eating the pizza, who
    cares which topping went on first?
    We're just trying to count the number of collections of 3 toppings,
    and each collection gives six possible sequences.
    Because if you choose 3 for a collection,
    there are 3 choices for the first thing in line, 2 for the second,
    and 1 for the last.
    So the multiplication principle tells us that the number of collections times 6
    is equal to 120.
    And solving for the number of collections
    gives 20 possible collections of three topics.
    Now the same argument solves the problem, in general.
    If capital N is the number of ways of choosing a collection of k objects
    without repetition from n objects, then we
    can count the number of sequences of k objects in two different ways.
    On the one hand, by our previous methods,
    we know that the number of sequences is n times n minus 1 times n minus 2,
    all the way down to n minus plus 1 or n factorial over n minus k factorial.
    On the other hand, every time we have a collection,
    it gives us exactly k factorial sequences.
    And so equating the two, we find that the number of collections
    of k objects without repetition from a set of n objects
    is the quotient of n factorial by n minus k factorial times k factorial,
    and that's our formula.
    The number of ways of choosing a collection of k objects
    without repetition from a set of n objects
    is given by that quotient-- n factorial over n minus k factorial times
    k factorial.
    Now this expression, this quotient of factorials,
    is so ubiquitous in mathematics that it has its own name and its own notation.
    The name of it is called a binomial coefficient.
    We're going to see in a later talk why it's called the binomial coefficient.
    But the notation is written as n choose k parentheses
    around n, which is listed above k.
    That just means the number of collections of k objects
    without repetition from an end set, and it's
    given by the formula n factorial divided by the product of n
    minus k factorial and k factorial.
    So a few observations are now in order.
    First, it's not at all obvious that this quotient of factorials
    is a whole number.
    If you justified by n minus k factorial, then you're
    left with a whole number, which is just n times n minus 1 times n minus 2
    down to minus k plus 1.
    But if you then try to divide that by k factorial, how
    do you know that there's nothing left in the denominator?
    Well, you can see this pretty easily in some simple cases like n
    choose 2, which is n times n minus 1 over 2.
    2 has to divide one of the numbers n or n minus 1 because 1 is even
    and the other is odd.
    But it gets more complicated in the next few cases.
    n choose 3 is n times n minus 1 times n minus 2 over 6,
    and n choose 4 is n times n minus 1 times n minus 2 times n minus 3
    over 24.
    Why is the numerator in the first case divisible by 6?
    Why in the second case divisible by 24?
    Well, the best argument to see that it's a whole number
    is to show that n choose k counts something.
    And what it counts is the number of collections
    of k objects from a set of n objects.
    Well, besides being whole numbers, binomial coefficients
    have a number of amazing properties.
    First, it's obvious from the definition that n
    choose k is equal to n choose n minus k because both
    are given by the same formula.
    They're both equal to n factorial over k factorial times n minus k factorial.
    But if you want to see this from the point of view of counting,
    think of it in the following way.
    The number of ways of choosing a collection of k objects from an end set
    is the same as the number of ways of choosing a collection of n minus k
    objects from this n set because every time you choose k objects,
    and you take them away from the set, the n minus k objects
    remain and give you a collection of n minus k objects.
    So every time you have a set of k objects,
    you also have a set of n minus k objects.
    And next, there's an important recursion rule
    that allows us to calculate binomial coefficients for n if we know
    the binomial coefficients for n minus 1, and that
    says that n choose k is the sum of n minus 1 choose k
    and the sum of n minus 1 choose k minus 1.
    Let's see how that works in a special case related to poker.
    We're going to show that 52 choose 5 is equal to 51 choose 5 plus 51
    choose four.
    Indeed, 52 choose 5 counts the number of hands of 5 cards--
    that's like a poker hand--
    dealt from a deck of 52 cards.
    The order in which the cards are dealt means nothing.
    It's just what cards you're holding in your hand.
    So it's a collection of five objects taken from a set of 52 objects.
    OK, now to get this recursion, we're going
    to divide these five hands into hands that either contain the ace of spades
    or don't contain the ace of spades.
    If a hand does not contain the ace of spades, then it's made up of 5 cards
    from the remaining 51 cards in the deck.
    So the number of hands that do not contain the ace of spades
    is 51 choose 5.
    If a hand does contain the ace of spades,
    then it's made from 4 cards in the remaining 51 cards in the deck.
    And so the number of hands that do contain the ace of spades
    is 51 choose 4.
    And since every hand either contains the ace of spades or doesn't contain,
    we get our recursion that 52 choose 5 is the sum of 51 choose 5 plus 51
    choose 4.
    End of transcript. Skip to the start.

Refer attached binomial.docx for derivations

2.1 Practice: Counting Collections

A subset either contains a or it doesn’t.
If the subset contains a, then what remains is a subset of size k − 1 from the remaining
universe of size n − 1. If the subset does not contain a, then it is a subset of size k from
the remaining universe of size n − 1. So by the sum rule, the RHS (right-hand side) also
counts the unordered subsets of size k: the first binomial coefficient counts those with a
and the second binomial coefficient counts those without.

An exam has 15 questions: eight true/false questions and seven multiple choice questions. You are asked to answer five of them, but your professor requires you to answer at least one true/false question and at least one multiple choice question. How many ways can you choose the questions you plan to answer?
(15  5)- (8 5)- (7   5)

2.3 Lesson: Applications of Collections:


Let's say you have a class of

students, eight of them girls and seven boys.
You want to choose a committee of four students, with two girls and two boys. How many ways can you do this? 

(8  2)*(7   2)


Suppose we want to choose a committee of four from among the students, but this time your constraint is that you don't want the committee to consist of all boys or all girls. Now how many ways can you do this? Choose the best answer.
(15  4)-(8  4)-(7  4)

In the -by- block grid shown, how many paths are there from your home in the southwest corner to the Science Center in the northeast corner?
(12 5)
In the -by- block grid shown, how many paths from your home in the southwest corner to the Science Center in the northeast corner pass by Mike's (
(5  2)*(7  2)
